
A defence for Maudlin’s primitivism

Maudlin in his book proposed a primitivist account of laws. (Maudlin 2010) Chen and Goldstein criticized Maudlin’s primitivism and suggested an even looser one called Minimal Primitivism. (Chen and Goldstein 2021) In this article, I try to evaluate Chen and Goldstein’s criticism and defend Maudlin’s view.

First of all, we will give a brief introduction to both views. Maudlin’s primitivism, like other kinds of primitivism, agrees that laws are fundamental entities that, while cannot be further analyzed, have governing power in our world. However, Maudlin argues that only dynamic laws are fundamental. A dynamic law is a law that operates on our world by dynamic production, which is the process to produce future states based on earlier states along the direction of time.

Chen and Goldstein argue that fundamental laws do not need to be dynamic. Although some fundamental laws can be dynamic, some are not. The removal of the dynamic constraint of laws results in Minimal Primitivism. The key difference is that Minimal Primitivism does not commit to the direction of time, nor the past and the future. And laws of nature do not, necessarily, operate on our world in the manner of dynamic production. To support this idea, Chen and Goldstein provided some examples of atemporal laws, laws that do not operate by dynamic production. And since these laws are actually practiced in physics, Maudlin’s view is wrong.

We will then look at those atemporal laws conceived to be counterexamples of Maudlin’s theory. Chen and Goldstein first mentioned Gauss’s law and the Mandelbrot set as examples of atemporal governing laws. I would like to first paraphrase the idea conveyed by these examples and get rid of the details of physics. Although I know not much about physics, I think this is possible.

Consider we are contemplating a world at a specific moment. The time is paused. Everything in this world is still arranged as usual in space, except that there is no motion at all. It is claimed that we can still notice some patterns in the arrangement of physical entities in this world. For example, we may notice that every proton consists of three quarks, and those three quarks are always of a specific arrangement: two up quarks and one down quark. No matter how many instances of protons that we examine, we cannot find one that is not constituted this way, so it is natural to think that there is a law saying that every proton, as a group of quarks, must have this arrangement. By this law, all other possible arrangements are ruled out. Suppose this law does have governing power, it seems not to be about dynamic production. It says nothing about future states, nor is it derived from earlier states. Therefore, it is an example of fundamental laws that are not dynamic.

However, I think this view is illusionary. This law seems to be atemporal but actually is not. To demonstrate this idea, we need to take into account other moments than where we have paused the time. Since Chen and Goldstein have taken the agnosticism of the direction of time as a virtue of Minimal Primitivism, we also do not suppose that time has direction. All we suppose is that time has multiple distinguishable moments. All of these moments form a set T. And for any moment t in T, there is no constraint about which next moment it could transit to, but we suppose that it can at least transit to one other moment in the set since it is intuitively natural after our experience of the not motionless world. So, the concept of time evolvement can be preserved as the transition of a moment to another, while not relying on the direction of time.

Now, we use t0 to denote the moment we have previously contemplated where the law about quark arrangement holds. We use t1 to denote a moment that t0 transits to. We then consider this question: does the law holds also for t1? Let us consider it in two cases.

If the law does not hold for t1, then the description of the law has to account for this distinction. It will need to include a parameter of time in its description. It might say, at t0 the law of quark arrangement holds, but at t1, it does not hold. Since there is a transition from t0 to t1, we can also say, when t0 evolves to t1, the law of quark arrangement holds no more. If the law has to distinguish among moments, it cannot be atemporal. And this argument can also be applied backward. We can examine whether the law of quark arrangement holds in the moments that transit to t0. If for some of them the law does not hold, it would require similar treatment. Therefore, it is not possible for the law to be atemporal if it does not always hold for the entire transition chain or tree that includes t0.

If the law does hold for t1, and it holds for every moment in the transition chain that includes t0, we still need to consider two cases. If there are some moments in T where the law does not hold, the law should also address it in its description and cannot be atemporal. Those are the moments that do not present themselves in the chain including t0 but nevertheless are possible moments to be found in T. It would be absurd that a fundamental law only has an effect when under some condition.

If the law holds for all possible moments in T, it might be called atemporal because it is not necessary to include the time parameter. However, there are still some lingering questions. Should the law now be written “for all t in T, the law holds” or simply “the law holds”? If the law is legitimate to be written as the latter, I think Chen and Goldstein are correct that some laws can be atemporal when they hold for every possible moment. But to me, these two statements clearly embed different information, and the law should be written as the former.

If we are unaware of moments and time, or there are no other moments at all, the latter expression might be adequate. But if we are aware of moments and time, the latter expression seems too vague to us. We do not know whether the law holds or not for other moments unless we are explicitly assured that it holds for every possible moment. It might have long been a hidden supposition of physics that laws hold anytime and anywhere as we believe in nature’s uniformity. We thus usually omit the time parameter in a law of physics. However, since we have committed to the existence of time, time is an issue and has to be treated. Any law that does not mention and specify time is vague and unintelligible. I argue that the time parameter should be appended to every law similar to the law of quark arrangement.

With the time parameter appended, the law that holds for every moment can be written in an equivalent form that uses time evolvement: “For any evolvement from a moment t to another moment, the law preserves that such and such.” And as Maudlin suggests, time evolvement is still relevant here. Some may argue that this form of statement does not involve dynamic production because it does not specify what states would be produced but only what states would not be produced, namely the states where the law fails. I admit this objection, and I would like to soften Maudlin’s view to only require laws to be about time.

Another example provided by Chen and Goldstein is the Past Hypothesis. If I am not wrong, the Past Hypothesis states the asymmetry property of time in our universe. The universe began in a low-entropy state, and over time its entropy will only increase. To make the argument valid, the Past Hypothesis has to be a fundamental law, and it is not about dynamic production. I do not know whether the Past Hypothesis is talking only about the beginning of the universe or is it valid for any time frame. If latter, I think it can be written as “for every evolvement of a moment t to another moment, the entropy of the universe increases.” But for the former, it presupposed an initial state of the universe and that state is irrelevant from any forthcoming moments. It amounts to the denial of time at all because at the beginning, time is yet to exist, so I do think my previous argument would fail. However, the beginning of time has been a classic philosophical question for long, and we have not seen an answer. For myself, I do doubt that this concept is intelligible.

So far, we have demonstrated that if we have committed to time and time’s “omnipresent” property, our statements of laws must include the parameter of time. Otherwise, they would be ignoring something that is actually here and is unacceptably vague. 

In the following, I will discuss the epistemological reason to believe in time as a necessary component of laws. Consider, if we find some patterns at a specific moment, why do we think that they are not accidental regularities? If there are many modal worlds, but only ours has the constraint of quark arrangement, we would not think that there is a law at all. We should consider it as a law only after we have visited some other worlds and find that in those worlds the constraint holds as well. In fact, we do not have the ability to visit other modal worlds, so our knowledge about laws for a specific moment cannot be sure.

However, if we consider different moments in time as different modal worlds, we find ourselves able in our lives to visit different worlds. If we do not conceive time as continuous, our world at this moment does not bear any connection to the world at a previous moment. They would have a largely similar but slightly different arrangement. Also, they are clearly possible. When presented to another person, they cannot tell whether these two are the same world, or they are two different parallel worlds in the modal sense. In my opinion, since I find no strong reason to commit myself to continuous time, I tend to believe that our world at two distinct moments are two different possible worlds. But since we now can visit and observe two possible worlds, we can see what properties are common among worlds, and we can be more confident that they are not accidental regularities. So, those laws that endure through time are what we can be epistemologically confident about. This explains why our scientific practice requires the repetition of experiments, and only those regularities that can be repeated at different moments would be accepted as laws of physics.

Therefore, I would argue that time is special and lies as a foundation under every talk about laws of our world. If there are no time and temporal evolvement, there would not either be meaningful laws because it is impossible to tell them apart from accidental regularities. This gives us a reason to commit to the existence of time and time evolvement. Once we do that, our laws should also be describing time.

Back to the previous question about the logical form of laws. As Chen and Goldstein would also agree, a primitive law is an entity that constrains possibilities. In modal language, a law is a statement that is prefixed by the necessity operator □. This operator constrains the statement following it to be true across all possible worlds. Or we may state it in English: “for every world w in all possible worlds W, such and such hold.” Then we can discover that if a law statement is written without the necessity operator, it is incomplete. For the same reason, we can say that if a law statement holds for every moment, but its quantifier over time is omitted, it is also incomplete and should not be adopted.

To conclude, the choice between Maudlinian Primitivism and Minimal Primitivism only depends on whether one is committed to the existence of time, but I see no reason to reject it. Therefore, I think Maudlin’s primitivism is still a good theory of laws.

Bibliography

Chen, Eddy Keming, and Sheldon Goldstein. 2021. "Governing Without A Fundamental Direction of Time: Minimal Primitivism about Laws of Nature." arXiv. October 19. Accessed December 7, 2021. https://arxiv.org/pdf/2109.09226.pdf.

Maudlin, Tim. 2010. "A Modest Proposal Concerning Laws, Counterfactuals, and Explanations." In The Metaphysics Within Physics, 5-49. Oxford University Press.
